---
title: "Introduction to Docker Containers"
tags: [docker, docker-container]
style: border
color: primary
description: This post describes the docker containers.
---

## Creating a container

When we call

```bash
docker container run
```

It performs two tasks:

- Creating container
- Starting the container

We can create container by

```bash
docker container create
```

We can start container by

```bash
docker container start
```

When we create container from an image, we can specify its configuration. It means we can specify the evironment variables, arguments, name, etc.

Understanding the command run command:

```bash
docker container run --rm -it ubuntu:latest /bin/bash
```

- `--rm` this option tells docker to delete the container when it exits.
- `-i` option tells docker that the current session will be interactive and that we want to keep STDIN open.
- `-t` option tells docker to allocate a pseudo-TTY

## Container configuration

### Name

To give a container name use

```bash
docker container create --name="my-cool-container" ubuntu:latest
```

### Labels

Lables are keyvalue pairs in Dockerfile (image).

We can specify label by using option flag `-l` or `--label`.

```bash
docker container run --rm -d --name="container-with-label" \
-l deployer=Vikas -l tester=Vikas \
ubuntu:latest
```

### Hostname

By default the hostname is same as the container id.

We can set the hostname by

```bash
docker container run --rm --it \
--hostname="mycontainer" ubuntu:latest /bin/bash
```

### Domain Name Server

TODO

### Storage volumes

When the default disk space allocated to a container is not appropriate for the job at hand, In these cases we need storage that can persist between container deployments.

In such case we use `--mount` or `-v` option. For example,

```bash
docker container run --rm --it \
--mount=type=bind,target=/mnt/session_data,source=/data \
ubuntu:latest /bin/bash
```

- When you use a bind mount, a file or directory on the host machine is mounted into a container.
- The file or directory is referenced by its absolute path on the host machine.
- Neither the host mount point nor the mount point in the container needs to preexist for this command to work properly. If the host mount point does not exists, then it will be created as a directory.

You can read more about the [bind mount here](https://docs.docker.com/storage/bind-mounts/).
